# The Process (in Sweden)

Once I knew transitioning is most likely the way to go, I contacted my
v√•rdcentral (local health care center) where I was treated for my
depression before.  I got an appointment with a psychologist in order
to get him write a letter to ANOVA, which is a team of health care
specialists dealing with various related topics, trans* included.
Told him the whole thing.  He asked questions, took notes of my
answers.  Later he gave me a call about the process.  He said the
letter is there and it will take nearly 6 months for me to receive my
first appointment.  Bummer.  Half-a-fucking-year of waiting.  Not that
I didn't know it before since there are quite a few online resources
telling how long one needs to stay strong in order to not commit
suicide.

## Out

Came out to my friends, everyone was very accepting.  Some of my
friends from the other country made a few pretty transphobic jokes
while not meaning bad.  Oh well, it's fine.  They get it eventually
and use name and pronouns correctly.  Considering how much transphobic
and homophobic my ex-country is, I consider it a miracle.

Came out to my parents over Skype since they live far away, in the
country I wish to not visit ever again.  Complete denial, anger,
gaslighting and even threats of physical violence.  I'll list a few
"standard arguments" a lot of parents try to use against their own
children:

 * You are not `insert gender here`!
 * You're an idiot. An idiot. A stupid fucking idiot.
 * This is a phase, you've always been like that, jumping from one thing to another.
 * You're mentally sick. Ask doctors to check you up.
 * Did doctors convince you? These bastards... Fucking Western Europe...
 * This is an effect of `insert antidepressant here`, I've just read it!
 * Do you want us to die of a heart attack?
 * If you ever chose to proceed, I think we don't want to see you.
 * You aren't welcome at our place.
 * I'll come and beat the shit out of you.

And so on.  We still don't talk about this topic anymore.  They didn't
even read up anything.

Came out at work.  Everyone is accepting, I've got a lot of great
responses to my coming out email.  People instantly started calling me
by new name even though I didn't ask for it in the email.  I got
gendered correctly as well.  Didn't expect any of that, really.

## Waiting

I thought it's not a big deal.  There are always things to take care
about while waiting.  There are hobbies to do.  Friends to hang out
with. Stuff to read.

The closer it would get to the 4 months point, the worse I'd feel
myself.  A constant fight between "I should wait" and "why the hell
would I ever wait".  To feel better I read upon facial hair removal
and phoned a place where electrolysis (a very painful method) was one
of the options.  The woman that picked up didn't really speak English
and asked me to call some other place instead, but by insisting I got
an appointment there.  She would try to convince me not to proceed on
that appointment but I was pretty stubborn and she gave up.  Remove my
hair and JUST TAKE MY MONEY, please.  It is expensive.

## Money

It's good when there _are_ money.  Many people don't have them enough.
Many people don't have them at all.  Swedish health care system takes
care of that by requiring one to pay up to a specific amount, and then
you don't pay anything at all for this year.  The problem is, Swedish
health care doesn't really help when you're transgender and might kill
yourself before ANOVA will diagnose you and allow to _use_ Swedish
health care system to _pay_ for the things like hair removal.  Or
provide HRT (hormone replacement therapy).

You can't get HRT before the diagnosis.  I mean, you _can_, but that
means buying online from another country, hoping it will come through
customs.  But it's expensive and it seems doctors are reluctant to
give you free blood analysis just because you decided to go DIY HRT.

There are labs that will take your money and take a great care of your
blood.  But it's very expensive.

You can't get surgery before the diagnosis.  I mean, you _can_, but
probably by flying elsewhere after being on a waiting list of length
that is proportional to surgeon's skills and results.  And it's
EXTREMELY expensive.

It's expensive to make yourself feel better.

## Better?

While doing electrolysis was good, it wasn't enough.  Every day it
would get worse.

I read a lot of stories about mental effects of HRT and it was too
late to forget them.  I wasn't much interested in _looking_ better,
mostly just wanted to not get into the same state of depression and
going suicidal like before, since _now_ I knew the reasons behind.

I lasted for 4 months.  Then I created a long document with all the
possible variants of antiandrogens and estrogen possible, with prices,
probably dosages per day.  I sorted the list by "ranking" all of the
items after reading as much as possible about every single one of
them.  It just ended up with most expensive ones at the top.  Then I
lasted for two more weeks and ordered it online.

I was excited and horrified at the same time.  Excited because finally
there is a chance of being alive throughout 2017.  Horrified because
it might kill me just as well if I do things wrong.  All this stuff
can be bad at your liver, apparently.

I got pills about one month later, a bit before moving to a new
apartment.

## Cyproterone

An antiandrogen.  The one killing testosterone.  Not approved in USA,
but is used in Europe.

Rumor has it, Spironolactone makes your boobs smaller.  Cyproterone,
on the other hand, is way more powerful and also activates
progesterone receptors.  Rumor has it, Progesterone makes your boobs
bigger and shapes them better.  It sounded like a double win.

I start with 25mg, half of a pill each morning.  Two weeks after I
reduce it to 12.5mg, then week after raise again to 12.5mg twice per
day (morning and evening).  I have no idea what I'm doing but
apparently my balls get like _x4_ times smaller, or something.  I
don't feel any need for sex, at all.  That is actually great.

My hairline just stopped receding altogether.

## Estradiol hemihydrate

_Not_ micronised, it has to go through your mouth, end up in your
stomach, and then through your liver into the blood flow.

Each pill is just 2mg-worth, which is considered "low", I guess.
Rumor has it, starting with estrogen before killing off your
testosterone is basically throwing estrogen pills into trash can.  I
waited one week before starting.  Cyproterone is amazingly quick
anyway.

For two weeks nothing happened.  Then I cried for no reason, once.
Then I started laughing more.  Smiling more.  Feeling better in
general.

One and half months in, my skin is very soft and not as oily as
before, my eyelashes are getting even bigger (they were huge
regardless), the shape of eyelids is changing.  The face as a whole
seems to be at change but considering how often I look into mirror
it's hard for me to spot where exactly the difference is.  Body hair
grows slower and in some places it becomes thinner and discolored.

I never took selfies before.  I'd ask not to take pictures of me.  Now
almost every day is a selfie day.  Sometimes I like what's in the
picture, sometimes I hate it, no idea what's different from one day to
another.

One night my nipples start hurting.  Might need some kind of a bra
soon.

## So is it better?

It is. No regrets whatsoever.

## ANOVA

They are not a huge team and waiting list is very long.  Applying in
the end of August 2016 meant I'd have to wait for 7 months.  It is
longer now.  I feel so sorry for everyone who ends up in waiting mode.
This really needs to change.

My first appointment is at 8am but I wake up at 5am.  I go there, show
my ID, pay 150kr and sit waiting.

A person calls me by my dead name and that's fine because they don't
know new one yet.  We go into a room to have a long talk with lots of
questions and answers.  Things I wrote in the intro are basically the
answers to many of these questions.  I mentioned coming out as well.
I weeped at the point of my night dreams, there is just no other way.

We talked about the changes I want to achieve.

Finally, I was told what will happen next.  My next appointment will
be in one or two months from now, there will many of appointments with
specialists of different kind (I'll mention which ones when I visit
them first).

I told about DIY HRT, wrote down the kinds and current dosages, and
they said a blood test will be arranged right away.  The whole talk
was really good.  I felt comfortable throughout it, and happy after.
Then I sat and waited for another person to call me (by my new name
this time!) for a blood test.  It was fairly quick, no pain, no faint.

People at ANOVA made me feel better.
