# Emotional and psychological effects of being on HRT

Overall, it's a positive experience.  But the details are a bit more
tricky.

Sad things first.

I can start crying just by thinking of either how I cried at some
point before, or by talking about things that are sad.  Before it was
really easy to block any kind of emotion except anger.  I'd get angry
fast and easy, but never the other way around.  Now it's changing:
instead of being angry in specific situations I become more sad.

Being "lonely and unloved" may cause some crying too.

There is nothing wrong with crying, it's just that it's really hard to
have a control over it just as before.

Ok, down with sadness.

Empathy.  I longed for it to come back after losing it to my
depression.  It returns slowly and I start seeing it.  It's like I
don't have to *emulate* feelings and *act* to express them anymore.  I
just have them, just need to be open and express them.  There is still
this bad habit of hiding them though, from before I lost them, but I'm
working on it.

Giggling and laughing.  It becomes *too* easy to start giggling.
Things that never seemed funny sometimes make me burst in laugh.  It
can be quite hard to stop it.  Oh well, I'm not even trying.  I like
it.

Calm.  A sense of things getting slower and less bothering.  Things
are way less stressful.  I had to force myself out of the apartment
before, it's more like a thing I actually *want* to do now.  Talking
to new people?  So much anxiety a month back, now when I expect to
have it again...  Just doesn't happen.

Being tired.  I think it relates to the initial phase of HRT and gets
better over time, but right now I feel tired *all* the time.  It's
weird since I think more things get done than before, and that feeling
of being tired does not have this kinda dark veil over it.  I'm just
tired, not dying.

Relaxing is more easy.  I'd sit with a laptop on my lap all the way up
to 1AM, easily, trying to force myself into doing something, anything.
Now it's like "fuck it, I'm tired; sleeeeeeep" at 9PM.  And then I'll
sleep until 7AM.

Sometimes I just sit in a chair with my eyes closed.  Not doing
anything, not thinking of anything.  Just sitting.

I don't "walk fast" as much as before.  I can walk slowly, not
pressuring myself.

It all might sound weird to some people, like "WTF, what was your
problem".  I don't know and don't care really.  It's getting better
and that's enough for me.

[Back](index.md)
